add common usage examples (#152)
ManageIQ/manageiq-rpm_build: README.md

| `manageiq-ui`              | `vmdb/public/{assets,packs,ui}`                                   |
| `manageiq-pods`            | **empty**                                                         |

* `/usr/lib/systemd/system/` contains systemd service files.
* `/var/www/miq/vmdb` contains application files.
* `/opt/manageiq/manageiq-appliance` contains files linked into `/etc/`.
* `/opt/manageiq/manifest` contains manifests.

## Steps

## Obtain container image for building RPMs

You can either download the latest build image or building a new one locally:

  - `docker pull manageiq/rpm_build:latest`
  - `docker pull manageiq/rpm_build:latest-jansa`
  - `docker build --pull --tag $USER/rpm_build:latest .`

Typically the first example works best but if you are modifying which files end up in the rpm, the third example is the one you want.

## Building a release

The github tag/branch is passed on the command line e.g.: `--git-ref jansa`. A few other options and explanations are availabe in [build.rb](blob/master/bin/build.rb#L8) for the basic installs.

```sh
docker run --rm manageiq/rpm_build:latest build --git-ref lasker --update-rpm-repo
```

> For older older builds, the `git-ref` is already stored in `config/options.yml` and not necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For older builds, the `git-ref` is already stored in `config/options.yml` and not necessary.
```

```sh
docker run --rm manageiq/rpm_build:jansa-3 build --update-rpm-repo
```

## Building a custom release

Sometimes it is necessary to build rpms with code from pull requests. This explains how to do that.

### Defining build parameters

The [options.yml](blob/master/config/options.yml) points to the appropriate repos and tag/branches.

A typical `options.yml` will only override the source and the refs. This example uses branch `feature1` from kbrock's github repo:

```sh
mkdir OPTIONS
vi OPTIONS/options.yml
```

```yaml
---
product_name:      manageiq
repos:
  ref:             master
  manageiq:
    url:           https://github.com/kbrock/manageiq.git
    ref:           feature1
  manageiq_appliance:
    url:           https://github.com/kbrock/manageiq-appliance.git
    ref:           feature1
```

The option file is brought into docker by mounting the directory with `-v $(pwd)/OPTIONS:/root/OPTIONS`

> Alternatively, a static directory may used like `/opt/OPTIONS/options.yml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, a static directory may be used like `/opt/OPTIONS/options.yml`.
```

### Using a custom NPM registry

Any of the keys in [options.yml](blob/master/config/options.yml) can be overridden.

   - If overriding the NPM registry, set the `npm_registry` key in the `options.yml`.
   - If building RPMs in Copr,
     - set the `rpm.repo_name` key in the `options.yml`.
     - run the container image with `-v <copr token file>:/root/.config/copr`.
   - If updating the RPM repo it would be helpful to attach a volume to hold the RPM cache with `-v <dir>:/root/rpm_cache`.
     Any RPMs not in the cache will be downloaded to the cache first.

### Artifacts

The purpose of this process is to build code from `manageiq-core`, `manageiq-gemset`, and `manageiq-appliance` into 2 sets of artifacts:

- `/root/BUILD/rpm_spec/*.tar.gz`
- `/root/BUILD/rpms/x86_64/manageis-*.rpm`

> Depending upon your usecase, there are a few ways to obtain these artifacts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending upon your use case, there are a few ways to obtain these artifacts:
```

- Have the container put the artifacts into a mounted volume.
- Manually copy the artifacts to a mounted volume.
- Extracting the artifacts from the docker container with a docker command.

### Having the container build files into a mounted volume

> Since the files are not uploaded, they need to be retrieved out of the repo before the container exits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the files are not uploaded, they need to be retrieved from the repo before the container exits.
```

Reviewer: IIRC, all of the files still exist on the mounted directory after the container exits, correct?

Author: once the primary process exists, you can not access the container anymore.

Author: I think I'm wrong here. I'll revisit and fix.

Since I am wrong, this greatly simplifies things. (thanks to jason't comments down below)

repos:
  ref:             master
  manageiq:
    url:           https://github.com/kbrock/manageiq.git
    ref:           feature1
  manageiq_appliance:
    url:           https://github.com/kbrock/manageiq-appliance.git
    ref:           feature1
```

The option file is brought into docker by mounting the directory with `-v $(pwd)/OPTIONS:/root/OPTIONS`

Alternatively, a static directory may used like `/opt/OPTIONS/options.yml`.

### Using a custom NPM registry

Any of the keys in [options.yml](blob/master/config/options.yml) can be overridden.

   - If overriding the NPM registry, set the `npm_registry` key in the `options.yml`.
   - If building RPMs in Copr,
     - set the `rpm.repo_name` key in the `options.yml`.
     - run the container image with `-v <copr token file>:/root/.config/copr`.
   - If updating the RPM repo it would be helpful to attach a volume to hold the RPM cache with `-v <dir>:/root/rpm_cache`.
     Any RPMs not in the cache will be downloaded to the cache first.

### Artifacts

The purpose of this process is to build code from `manageiq-core`, `manageiq-gemset`, and `manageiq-appliance` into 2 sets of artifacts:

- `/root/BUILD/rpm_spec/*.tar.gz`

> - `/root/BUILD/rpms/x86_64/manageis-*.rpm`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `/root/BUILD/rpms/x86_64/manageiq-*.rpm`
```

Depending upon your usecase, there are a few ways to obtain these artifacts:

- Have the container put the artifacts into a mounted volume.
- Manually copy the artifacts to a mounted volume.
- Extracting the artifacts from the docker container with a docker command.

### Having the container build files into a mounted volume

Since the files are not uploaded, they need to be retrieved out of the repo before the container exits.

Note: all mounted volumes (i.e.: using the `-v` option) need to be defined in docker's preferences:

```

> Settings > Resources > FILE SHARING

Reviewer 2: We probably should mark this as being Docker on Mac specific...this steps doesn't make sense for normal Docker.  I'm ok with a follow-up PR though.

Author: thanks - I'll dump this section. now that you found out that you do not need to put every directory into there, this makes the use case much easier

## Output

It produces the following rpms:

| rpm                        | contents                                                          |
|----------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `manageiq-appliance-tools` | **empty**                                                         |
| `manageiq-gemset`          | `/opt/manageiq/manageiq-gemset/` gems, providers, ui-classic      |
| `manageiq-gemset-services` | `manageiq-provider-*{.target,@.service}`                          |
| `manageiq-core`            | `vmdb/{app,certs,content,lib,product,systemd}`                    |
| `manageiq-core-services`   | `manageiq-*{.target,@.service}`                                   |
| `manageiq-system`          | `/etc/{default,chron}, /usr/bin/evm*, system/{evm,miq}*.service`  |
| `manageiq-appliance`       | `/etc/httpd/conf.d/manageiq-*, /etc/motd.manageiq`                |
| `manageiq-ui`              | `vmdb/public/{assets,packs,ui}`                                   |
| `manageiq-pods`            | **empty**                                                         |

* `/usr/lib/systemd/system/` contains systemd service files.

> * `/var/www/miq/vmdb` contains vmdb files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `/var/www/miq/vmdb` contains application files.
```

* `/opt/manageiq/manageiq-appliance` contains files linked into `/etc/`.
* `/opt/manageiq/manifest` contains manifests.

## Steps

> ## Obtain container base image

Reviewer 2: This seems unclear...instead can we use

```suggestion
## Obtain container image for building RPMs
```

> You can either downloading the latest build image or building a new one locally:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can either downloading the latest build image or build a new one locally:
```

  - `docker pull manageiq/rpm_build:latest`
  - `docker pull manageiq/rpm_build:latest-jansa`
  - `docker build --pull --tag $USER/rpm_build:latest .`

If you modify files in in this respository like adding a file to the rpm, it is necessary to rebuild this image as shown by the third example.

> Do keep in mind that having a local `Gemfile.lock` before running `docker build` can cause versioning issues with bundler.

Reviewer: Should we dockerignore Gemfile.lock?

Reviewer 2: Maybe?  In production builds we _want_ to bring a Gemfile.lock during rpm build because we want to ensure we aren't arbitrarily updating gems.  We usually have a Gemfile.lock.release file, but I don't know how @simaishi made that be the "real" lock file.

Reviewer 2: Oh I misunderstood this - I was thinking the Gemfile.lock was the _application's_ Gemfile.lock as opposed to the one for manageiq-rpm_build itself.  Yeah, for the latter, we can probably .dockerignore that.

## Building a release

The github tag/branch is passed on the command line e.g.: `--git-ref jansa`. A few other options and explanations are availabe in [build.rb](blob/master/bin/build.rb#L8) for the basic installs.

```sh

> docker run -v --rm manageiq/rpm_build:latest-jansa build --git-ref jansa --update-rpm-repo

Reviewer 2: This has a -v but doesn't pass an actual volume...was it missed?  (Same with the next command)

```

```sh
docker run -v --rm manageiq/rpm_build:jansa build --build-type release --git-ref jansa-1-alpha1 --update-rpm-repo
```

## Building a custom release

Sometimes it is necessary to build rpms with code from pull requests. This explains how to do that.

### Defining build parameters

> The [options.yml](blob/master/config/options.yml) pointing to the approperate repos and tag/branches.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [options.yml](blob/master/config/options.yml) points to the appropriate repos and tag/branches.
```

Any of the keys in [options.yml](blob/master/config/options.yml) can be overridden.

   - If overriding the NPM registry, set the `npm_registry` key in the `options.yml`.
   - If building RPMs in Copr,
     - set the `rpm.repo_name` key in the `options.yml`.
     - run the container image with `-v <copr token file>:/root/.config/copr`.
   - If updating the RPM repo it would be helpful to attach a volume to hold the RPM cache with `-v <dir>:/root/rpm_cache`.
     Any RPMs not in the cache will be downloaded to the cache first.

### Artifacts

The purpose of this process is to build code from `manageiq-core`, `manageiq-gemset`, and `manageiq-appliance` into 2 sets of artifacts:

- `/root/BUILD/rpm_spec/*.tar.gz`
- `/root/BUILD/rpms/x86_64/manageis-*.rpm`

Depending upon your usecase, there are a few ways to obtain these artifacts:

- Have the container put the artifacts into a mounted volume.
- Manually copy the artifacts to a mounted volume.
- Extracting the artifacts from the docker container with a docker command.

### Having the container build files into a mounted volume

Since the files are not uploaded, they need to be retrieved out of the repo before the container exits.

> Note: all mounted volumes (i.e.: using the `-v` option) need to be defined in docker's preferences:

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what this means - I've never needed the volumes in docker preferences as far as I can remember.

Reviewer: Is this a Docker on Mac thing?

Author: yea mac thing

Author: thanks for solving this. With this knowledge, the `-v` option is much better

```

> Settings > Resources > FILE SHARING

Reviewer 2: What is this referencing?

Author: if you want to add a mounted volume using `-v`, then you will need to add the volume to your file share and restart docker.

Author: thnx - verified - removed

```

For this example, 2 directories exist in the current directory (`pwd`):

- `OPTIONS` a directory contains the `options.yml` file
- `BUILD` a directory that will contain the `tar.gz` and `rpm` files.

Note: The contents of `BUILD` will be deleted before each run.

```sh

> docker run -v --rm -v `pwd`/OPTIONS:/root/OPTIONS -v `pwd`/BUILD:/root/BUILD manageiq/rpm_build:latest build

Reviewer 2: There's an extra -v after the run.

```

### Manually copying files to a mounted volume

Since defining the mount points can be inconvenient, it is possible to just run a build and copy out the files out.
The trick is to run the container as a daemon and in a way that it does not exit before you have copied out the resources.

#### Running the container in daemon mode

```sh
# setup docker and remember the CONTAINER id

> CONTAINER=`docker run -d -it -v $(pwd)/OPTIONS:/root/OPTIONS manageiq/rpm_build:latest`

Reviewer 2: it's generally a lot easier if you're running a daemonized container to give it a name using `--name`.  Then later you just reference the container by name directly, and then no need for env vars or anything.

```

Alternatively `CONTAINER` can be assigned from the list of recent docker containers:

```sh
docker container ls
```

#### Attaching and running a build

The commands to run a build in the docker container can be found in the [entrypoint](blob/master/container-assets/user-entrypoint.sh#L17) script.

```sh
docker exec -it ${CONTAINER} /bin/bash

cd /build_scripts
export GEM_HOME=$(ruby -e 'puts Gem.user_dir')
export PATH=$GEM_HOME/bin:$HOME/bin:$PATH
bundle
./bin/build.rb
```

#### Pushing the build artifacts to a mounted volume

From here you can copy the rpms to an output. `/root/OPTIONS/rpms/` is convenient since `/root/OPTIONS` is mounted anyway.

```sh
cp -v /root/BUILD/rpms/x86_64/m* /root/OPTIONS/rpms/
```

#### Pulling the build artifacts out of docker

An alternative is to exit out of docker and have docker go into the container and copy them to your local file system

```sh

> docker cp ${CONTAINER}:/root/BUILD/rpms/x86_64/ ./rpms/

Reviewer 2: This is generally the easiest way if you're using a daemonized container...I think we should just remove the "Pushing the build artifacts to a mounted volume" section, personally, to simplify (too many choices => paradox of choice)

Author: to be honest, I tend to go in, build it, an while I'm in there just copy to /root/OPTIONS

I'd prefer just a `--copy-rpms $TARGET` option using build and be done with it.

Reviewer: > to be honest, I tend to go in, build it, an while I'm in there just copy to /root/OPTIONS
> 
> I'd prefer just a `--copy-rpms $TARGET` option using build and be done with it.

Wouldn't it be easier to use a second volume mount rather than daemonize, exec into it, then copy to a volume mount?

Author: 1. removing push
2. I find it easier to mount all these directories but I will try again and see how it goes. I've already been convinced of a number of changes that are making this easier

Author: thanks for the question. Misunderstandings of previous errors had me going in a tangent.
